---
layout: post
title: "Software Carpentry at UNH: The backstory"
date: "2015-09-21"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
---

I first heard of [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org) in a
YouTube video of its founder Greg Wilson's talk at the SciPy 2014 conference:

<center>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1e26rp6qPbA" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

</center>

The talk really impressed me. I was convinced that their work was absolutely
crucial for an open and more productive research community to exist. This was a
mostly selfish thought, by the way. I was tired of reading papers with seemingly
awesome results, but not having access to the source code to reproduce (and
maybe build upon) those results. I was also fed up with emailed Word documents
and the resulting lost changes and half-baked version-control-via-file-name. I
was never taught any better though, which is exactly why we need groups like
Software Carpentry!

Shortly after watching the talk, I submitted a form on the Software Carpentry
website requesting more information regarding hosting a workshop at UNH, where I
am currently wrapping up a PhD in mechanical engineering. I ended up getting
some information, but decided I had enough on my plate with research and put the
idea back on the shelf.

Fast-forward six months or so. I received an email from the man himself, Greg
Wilson, asking what I thought about hosting a workshop at UNH. Almost
star-struck, I was reinvigorated and decided to try to get the ball rolling.
Besides, graduating is overrated anyway.

I had some emails sent around my department and the School of Marine Science and
Engineering (SMSOE) to gauge interest. To my surprise, more than 20 people
responded, which was enough to move forward. The next task was to find funding
for the administrative fee and travel and accommodations for the volunteer
instructors. A couple proposals later, the SMSOE and ME department agreed to
fund the workshop at an approximate 80/20 ratio.

The workshop was to take place during the summer, which made finding instructors
within close proximity (to save on travel costs) a little tricky. A few rounds
of prospective candidates later, Byron Smith, a PhD candidate in Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology at the University of Michigan, and Ivan Gonzalez, a
physicist and programmer at the Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging in Boston
agreed to teach our workshop. Software Carpentry also found us another helper,
Daniel Hocking, who is a UNH PhD alum in Natural Resources and Environmental
Studies currently working at the USGS Conte Anadromous Fish Research Center.
Being volunteers for such a great organization, there was no question that these
guys were going to do an awesome job.

I was excited. We had the funding, the room, the instructors, and the dates set.
The only thing left was to get some learners registered and make it happen!
